=head1 Marriage in China

This is supposed to be a short introduction to Chinese wedding customs from my
personal (Dutch male) point of view and it is certainly not a universal truth.
I also don't want to go into detail of the actual wedding, but rather explain
all the things before and after getting married. When I write in present tense,
I am talking about customs, whereas past tense indicates personal experience.

=head2 Asking for her hand

In traditional European families, it used to be customary for the man to ask
the woman's father for her hand. Her father would decide on grounds of wealth
and future prospects, whether that man is suitable for his daughter. In China,
this is still customary, but slightly different.

When a couple is serious about their relationship, the man will invite the
woman's parents for dinner. On the first encounter, the man should offer a
cigarette to both parents, father first. Before that, the man should greet both
parents separately, shake hands with both and of course, smile. On parting, he
should give the parents a present. In my case, this was a big box of cigarettes
(250 CNY or $38) for her father, because he really likes to smoke. If you don't
know anything, fruits are always nice. If you decide to buy fruits, buy a
B<lot>. At least one full bag of different fruits.

The dinner should take place in a restaurant. It should not be too cheap but
also not too expensive (Chinese norms). Your girlfriend will know what is
appropriate. I paid around 150 CNY (about $23 and thus much cheaper than the
cigarettes I bought as a present) for a rich dinner out with five people: my
girlfriend, her sister, her parents and me.

When the waiter brings the menu, let her father choose a wine. In my case, he
didn't want any wine, so we ordered a bottle of sprite. The restaurant served
tea. I strongly recommend going to the restaurant you are planning to take her
parents to beforehand. That way, you can find out what kind of food they serve
and what is likely to be their taste. This will prevent awkward situations in
which you have no idea what the food you are ordering really is. You might be
ordering fish brains (the most disgusting thing I ever ate in my life). Many
restaurants offer menus with photographs, making the decision easier. By the
way, if you are offered the head of a fish, B<eat it>, no matter how disgusting
it is. It is a great honour to eat it.

During dinner, her parents will ask many questions about what you are planning
to do with their daughter. Do you want to marry her? Where do you want to live?
Obviously, they will want both of you to live in their hometown. I expected
them to ask me about my job and study and financial status, but they never
(even until now), they never asked. Perhaps they assume that the equation
C<foreign = rich> always holds.

Apparently, it is common for her parents to visit your apartment after dinner,
to discuss some more. My girlfriend had expected this and moved all her
personal belongings into bags under my bed, before we went out. I didn't know
what they were talking about in my room, but it took a long time and I had a
hard time looking interested while they were discussing.

At the end, her parents left with a handshake.

=head2 Engagement

This is an area where I haven't been, yet. This is a collection of explanations
from my girlfriend, her sister and her parents.

Engagement in China is very important. It is even more important than the
wedding itself. Basically, when a couple is engaged, it means they B<will> get
married. The wedding itself is just a formality and a dinner involving a
wedding dress and a lot of gan bei (cheers). Expect to be drunk.

When a man wants to get engaged with a woman, he needs to give a lot of money
to her parents, at least 10K or 20K CNY ($3,000) and that will probably come
from his parents, as no young Chinese man has that kind of liquid funds. This
money will be used to buy things for the wedding, such as the wedding dress.
Don't think, however, that the woman's parents will take care of everything.
No, they will just use the man's money to organise the woman's side of the
wedding. The man still needs to pay for his own stuff, as well.

Traditionally, her parents will also need to visit your hometown for
inspection. In my case, being a foreigner, this part is likely to be scratched
from the TODO list (we can't expect her parents to make the trip to Germany,
can we?). However, even as a foreigner, the man has one huge obligation: he
needs to provide a house. A rented apartment won't do, he needs to own one. I
was told the amount of money I should expect to spend on this was 300K CNY
(around $46,000). In China, this house is paid for by the man's parents.

=head2 Marriage

After getting married, the couple will move to their new house, but probably
just live in it for about 2 to 4 weeks per year, during the spring festival.
The rest of the time, someone else lives in it, to take care of reparations,
cleaning, etc. Who this someone is, is unclear. Most of the time, someone in
the family is willing to move there, but they need to move out when the couple
has children.

Having children is an interesting subject. When the couple has children, these
children will live in their house, while the couple lives somewhere else (in a
big city, to earn money). The man's parents will take care of the offspring.
Naturally, the question arises, who will live in the man's parents' old
house? Usually, this means his parents will separate (not officially, but they
will live in separate houses). His mother will live in the man's house and his
father will stay behind in their own house (possibly together with B<his>
parents).

=head2 Summary and calculations

=over

=item The man's family needs to pay for the wedding (20K).

=item The man's family needs to buy a house (300K).

=item The man's family will live with the couple.

Thus, the couple needs to earn enough money to provide for themselves and his
parents.

=item The woman's family doesn't need to pay for anything, but needs the money.
for when they are old.

=item The average income per person in China is 12K CNY per year.

Thus, saving for a house will take at least 25 years of saving B<every penny>.

=back

Now, I see one big flaw in the system. Think about what happens if a man has a
son? First, the man's family will need to pay for the house the man will live
in. Then, the man will need to provide for himself, his wife and his parents.
Then, when the couple has a son, the man needs to pay for his son's education.
And here comes the doozie: the man has to buy a house for his son. How on earth
is he supposed to do that while providing for two families? I don't have an
answer to that, yet. Bottom line: if you are a man and have a son, you're
fucked.

I'm curious to see what will come on my path.
