=head1 Why not to use Perl

Perl is a highly dynamic language in which complex tasks can be solved within
a few lines of elegant code. It has downsides, however, and I will elaborate
on a few of them here.

=head2 Errors caught at runtime

Since Perl is a dynamic language, it has no type checking aside from the
syntax errors that result from incorrectly using scalars, arrays or hashes.
This means that errors in code can only be caught at runtime.

Unless you explicitly ask for it using C<strict>, things can go wrong and they
may not at all be obvious. For instance, without the C<strict> pragma, Perl
allows programmers to use "bare words" as string literals. You can write
C<$a = hello; print $a;> and it writes "hello" to C<stdout>.

When changing an existing program erroneously, the error may not be caught
right away and may cause problems in areas where none are expected.

=head2 C<eval>-blocks catch I<all> errors

In Perl, exceptions are caught with C<eval> blocks. These catch all errors, so
if you want to catch only a few, you need to catch all, find out whether your
type of exception was the one thrown and rethrow the exception if not:

=begin code perl

   eval {
      function_that_throws_exception $arg1, $arg2
   };
   if ($@) {
      if (ref $@ eq "My::Exception") {
         handle_error
      }
      die; # rethrow
   }

=end code perl

This does not even work when C<ref $@> is an empty string, meaning C<$@> was
a plain scalar. In that case, you have to compare the error strings, which may
be localised, making it even harder to catch exactly the error you need.

By the way, C<eval> is not only an exception handling keyword, it is also a
string evaluation keyword. This may cause confusion to beginners.

=head2 Easy to write bad code

Perl makes it very easy to write code and APIs. Where strictly object oriented
languages such as Java enforce a certain paradigm, Perl allows one to design
APIs like the Irssi scripting API. There is an awful lot of crappy Perl code
out there, people tend to call "line noise". While it is possible to write
crappy code with Java, it is much harder to do so than in Perl.

=head2 Many pitfalls

There are many areas in the language that can bite you if you don't know about
them.

=head2 Features built into the language

Perl has many more or less known features that are built into the language.
One of them is L<formats|http://perldoc.perl.org/perlform.html>. The problem
with this is that there is no easy way of replacing or enhancing the
functionality provided by them. Perl formats cannot be returned from functions
nor can they be manipulated after their creation.

=head2 Arrays or array references

Arrays of arrays do not exist in Perl and an attempt to create one yields a
flattened array such that C<((1, 2, 3), 2, 3)> becomes C<(1, 2, 3, 2, 3)>.
In order to create an array of arrays, you need to create an array of
references to arrays like this: C<([1, 2, 3], 2, 3)>. But then getting the
array back out of the reference, it is necessary to dereference it, so that
where in Lisp one can do:

=begin code lisp

   (setq array '((1, 2, 3), 2, 3))
   (first array) ; Yields (1, 2, 3)

=end code lisp

But in Perl, the same code requires:

=begin code perl

   my @array = ([1, 2, 3], 2, 3);
   $array[0]; # Yields "ARRAY(0xdeadbeef)" or similar
   @{ $array[0] }; # Dereferencing it yields our array (1, 2, 3)

=end code perl

The reason for this is that it makes it possible to C<push> a list of items
onto an array.

=head2 Implicit behaviour

Simple, machine oriented languages such as C contain very little magic. Perl
does. An example is the ability to assign an array to a hash:
C<my %hash = (1, 2, 3, 4)>. The resulting hash contains:
C<< (1 => 2, 3 => 4) >>. The language is full of implicit behaviour, which I
call "magic".

=head2 Functions interfaces

In Perl, functions do not need to provide prototypes and a lot of code indeed
does not. If it does, C<perl> can check whether the provided number of
arguments is correct, but the callee still has to manually decode the argument
list from C<@_>, the argument stack. The usual way is to do this as the first
thing in a function like: C<my ($a, $b, $c) = @_;>. This is not required,
though, and it is not rare that code uses C<@_> directly with subscript
access. That makes the code unreadable.

=head2 Circular references

Perl has no cycle breaking system in its reference counting. This means you
can introduce memory leaks with circular references. For this, Perl provides
C<Scalar::Util::weaken>, but you still have to do it.
