=head1 Autocomb

C<Autocomb> is a make-inspired build system that compiles to GNU Autotools.

L<Git repository|https://github.com/pippijn/makequick>

This is the future development of L<Autoproj|autoproj>. While Autoproj is a
working piece of software, C<C<Autocomb>> is nowhere, yet. At the moment, there are
only ideas, but not much code. The ideas are also very much in flux, so don't
expect much stability.

=head2 Introduction

C<Autocomb> compiles a purely declarative build definition to POSIX-compliant and
thus fairly portable L<automake|http://www.gnu.org/software/automake/> input. It
solves a few problems with automake, such as the fact that libraries must appear
in topological order with respect to internal dependencies. This is still a
problem with automake. It basically means that the following automake code fails
during installation:

   lib_LTLIBRARIES = liba.la libb.la
   liba_la_LIBADD = libb.la

C<lib_LTLIBRARIES> must list the libraries in topological order, so that a
definition as C<libb.la liba.la> would work. C<Autocomb> solves this problem by
topologically sorting the libraries and emitting a properly sorted
C<lib_LTLIBRARIES>.

Another issue with automake is poor extensibility. Inference rules can be used
to extend automake with new source formats. By adding the new source extensions
to C<SUFFIXES>, automake knows about them and generates the proper C<.c> to
C<.o> rules. However, if you have a program, which is used to build other
sources, you will want to add this to the dependency list for the resulting
sources. With inference rules, this is not possible, so you need to write one
rule per source file. With many source files, this is a very tedious task and
there are two solutions: use GNU Make with pattern rules or generate the rules
with a script. Pattern rules can get very L<complex|http://xinutec.org/git/aldor/compiler.git/tree/src/aldor/Rules.am?id=5f356e51ca7d642d8ef157404004b42e36ea9012>
if you want to support target-specific flags for your tool. Generating rules is
always ad-hoc and each type of rules needs its own script.

Yet another issue is the lack of wildcards. While wildcards have several
disadvantages, they also have many advantages and it is the author's opinion
that a good programmer should not suffer, because bad programmers might abuse a
feature. The same holds for build systems. Advanced features should not be
withheld from advanced users. C<Autocomb> supports but discourages the use of
wildcards.

=head3 Autotools integration

C<Autocomb> input is translated to one or more C<Makefile.am>s and a single
C<configure.ac>. The unification of automake and autoconf was done, because a
lot of knowledge from automake input has to be duplicated in the autoconf input.
Things such as which libraries to check for at configure time so that they may
be linked against in the Makefile or submodule dependencies are present in both
formats. C<Autocomb> attempts to unify these formats in a new format based on QML and
GNU Make.

=head3 Flexibility

C<Autocomb> is, by design, much less flexible than automake and autoconf. It is also
much stricter. It gives the user some additional tools the author has been
missing in the GNU build system.

Source files are looked for in the entire source tree. Files are not explicitly
included by other files. Autoconf scripts may be included in the C<project>
block. Additional automake rules may be included in rule files. This gives you
all the flexibility back at the expense of the included files being essentially
a black box to C<Autocomb>, thus defeating its static analysis features. C<Autocomb>
guarantees that pure projects, i.e. without external Autotools input, do not
cause errors at a lower level. This can no longer be guaranteed in the presence
of such black boxes.

=head3 Unsupported features

C<Autocomb> does not plan on supporting percentages, because the author does not
believe in those. C<cmake> is a build system that supports such comfort.

=head2 Documentation

The documentation is too large, so that it had to be distributed over multiple
pages.

=over

=item L<project|project>

=item L<variables|variables>

=item L<targets|target>

=item L<template|template>

=item L<rules|rules>

=back
