=head1 Why to use C++

These are a few arguments why to use C++.

=over

=item High performance (@performance)

C++ can be very fast. It can be very lightweight and execute code with very
high performance. Also, modern compilers do an excellent job on optimising
code. They can generate assembler code specific to a processor and optimise
for specific branch predictors or even models of branch predictors.

=item Little magic (@nomagic)

The only things magical in C++ are the operators on built-in types. The
operators on strings such as less-than comparison, equality comparison and
assignment are all well-defined in the C++ standard library. They can be
inspected and modified at will. It would be even nicer if it were possible to
override the operators for built-in types within certain classes or namespaces.

=item Pragmatic (@pragmatic)

Being a multi-paradigm language, C++ adapts to real-world problems with fairly
little effort. Functional programming can be achieved with function pointers,
upcoming lambda expressions (which are currently emulated with function-local
classes). Object oriented is built in using classes and full inheritance.
Procedural programming is done with functions.

=item Flexible (@flexible)

With sufficient effort, it can be made to do almost anything any other
language can do. This effort may be enormous, but it is possible.

=item Unrestrictive (@unrestrictive)

Many see this as a negative aspect of a language, but in C++ you are able to
force your machine into doing exactly what you want. You are not limited by
the language, only by your skill and imagination. Even though you may only
abuse the language in a very small area (my C<hash_table> implementation
abuses C++ in exactly one line), this small amount of abuse may be essential
for performance (that single line makes the code much more efficient).

=item Easy to interface with other languages (@interop)

=item Templates (@templates)

The C++ C<template> system is a very powerful code generator.

=item Choices (@choices)

Instead of enforcing checks, C++ allows optional checking for runtime errors
such as invalid array accesses, buffer overflows, invalid pointer dereferences
and more. These checks slow down the program in the same way automatically
checked languages like Java are slowed down. The difference is that in C++
you have the choice.

This is one of the main strengths of C++: it leaves many things open to the
programmer. They can choose to use automatic memory management or to manually
free all used memory. They can decide where to store the created objects.
Choices include the stack, the heap and a specialised object allocator.

=item Standard library is to the point (@stdlib)

The C++ standard library is much more limited than the Java class library, but
it is much more to the point. It provides tools that are used in almost any
program. Features include data structures, algorithms, streams and simple
template metaprogramming tools. The GNU C++ library is 7MB which is tiny compared
to the 105MB of the Java class library. This limited set of features make C++
much more portable than Java. C++ can be implemented on platforms that provide
no graphical user interface. While the Java core language can be implemented
on such platforms, the class library can't.

=item Operator overloading (@operators)

This is a very important feature and is used to create algorithms that operate
on pointers and primitive arrays as well as classes. It also allows us to
create used defined datatypes that act like built-in types. With C++, it is
possible to define a C<rational> class that has all mathematical operators
defined and can be used just like a normal floating point number.

=item Multiple inheritance (@mi)

Although arguably a bad feature, multiple inheritance makes many things a lot
easier. It can be abused, but it can also be used right. An example I can give
here is inheritance to gain memory allocation semantics. For instance, if you
write a high performance slice allocator that defines C<operator new> and
C<delete>, inheriting from it will make the class automatically and
transparently allocated using this slice allocator:

=begin code cpp

   template<typename T>
   struct slice_allocated
   {
     void *operator new (size_t);
     void operator delete (void *);
   };
   struct node : node_base, slice_allocated<node>
   {
     // some code here
   };

=end code cpp

Here, multiple inheritance is required to inherit the code from the allocator
as well as the code from C<node_base>. Things like that would not be possible
with single inheritance.

=item Scoped resource management (@raii)

This allows for the RAII design pattern. It acquires a resource when
initialising an object and releases it when destroying the object. See the
L<Why not to use Java|why-not-use_java.xhtml#raii> page for an example.

=item C<const>-correctness

C++ can, using the C<const> keyword, help the programmer prevent modification
to unwritable objects. This can prevent accidental modification of actual
read-only data such as string literals but also indicate what a programmer may
do with an object. As always, there are ways to work around the constness of
an object using C<const_cast> but that is rarely a good idea and may result in
L<undefined behaviour|why-not-use_cpp.xhtml#ub>. Member functions marked
C<const> indicate that those functions do not modify the data structure they
operate on. This is both documenting and error preventing. Using top-level
C<const> on function parameters prevents assignment of such (and therefore
works like Java's C<final> keyword).

The C<const> keyword helps the design-by-contract strategy.

=back

=head2 Links

=over

=item L<The Java (not really) Faster than C++ Benchmark|http://bruscy.republika.pl/pages/przemek/java_not_really_faster_than_cpp.html>

=back
